Hi, I'm Gardener Scott.
There are few things as good as a fresh tomato
from a plant you grew in your own garden and knowing a few tips can make the whole effort
easier and more successful.
Join me as I show you how I prune tomatoes for the best harvest.
I grow my tomatoes vertically and this is a method I recommend. You may have seen my other video that shows how I trellis the tomatoes
But growing vertically, I can put more tomatoes closer together and get a bigger harvest.
But if you just let them go.
they run rampant and before long it's difficult to even walk among your tomatoes.
So understanding how to prune them
for the best control and the best harvest
Is really important and it really only comes down to a couple steps.
First, it's important to understand what type of tomato plants you're growing. There's basically two types, there are
determinate tomatoes and
Indeterminate tomatoes. Now, the determinate tomatoes are a bush tomato.
They don't vine, they just grow up to a certain size 3, 4, maybe even 5 feet.
When they hit that size that's the end of their growth period and then they set flowers and all those flowers turn into
tomatoes and the harvest comes within a relatively short period of time,
one or two weeks. And when all those tomatoes are harvested that's pretty much the end of what that plant will produce.
Indeterminate tomatoes are
vining tomatoes. Though not a true vine, they'll grow and grow and grow
until they die.
The difference being that as they grow they'll set
their flowers and the flowers will turn into tomatoes and you'll have a harvest of tomatoes and then as the plant grows
it'll set another cluster of flowers,
and those flowers will turn into tomatoes and the plant will continue to grow.
Those are the type of tomatoes that many gardeners like to have because you can go out every night and harvest some
tomatoes.
The reason it's important to understand which type of tomato plant you're growing is because the way you prune them is different.
For these determinant tomatoes behind me, I'm going to let them grow with
minimal pruning because most of the branches that will be producing fruit
I want to leave on the plant. If I prune them off, I'm going to be losing some of that production.
I'll do some pruning, and I'll show you that a little later on, with some of the lower
branches to try to prevent some disease and pest issues.
But for the most part I let determinate tomatoes grow and I don't prune them.
But for indeterminate tomatoes, a plant can easily take over the garden because they just keep growing and keep growing
and before long I might have
branches that start encroaching into the pathway or into other
plants and I really want to try to keep the plants under control so I can keep them growing in the direction
I want them to grow. Now, will I lose some production on the branches that I prune off?
Yes, I will but I'm allowing the plant that remains to be stronger,
more robust, and
actually give me an abundance of fruit without having to just let it go wild.
The way that tomatoes grow
Is from a tip and this growing tip will continue to grow until the plant dies.
It comes from the main
stem that will go all the way back down to the base of the plant and as the tomato grows
there'll be a junction and at the junction is a side branch that just has leaves to
conduct photosynthesis and get energy for the plant.
At most of the junctions you'll see a flower cluster and this is what develops into the tomatoes,
but you'll also see another
growing point and this is a sucker and on most indeterminate tomatoes
you'll see suckers develop at every junction
between a side branch and the main stem and
then you'll have a flower cluster. As you proceed down the plant you'll see the main stem,
a side branch,
and a sucker.
Because this has been happening as long as the plant is growing, in
these junctions you
have these suckers and if left in place, these suckers will continue to grow.
And they'll also form their own
suckers between the main stem and
the side branches and each one of these suckers now has the potential of growing and
setting off new suckers. Before you know it you've got suckers and new branches everywhere.
For smaller plants, I just pluck out the suckers as I see them growing. Just take my thumb and
just pinch it off.
Everywhere I see one,
As it grows
it'll continue to give
bigger suckers
all along the plant at each
of these junctions.
Sometimes it's difficult to determine which one is the sucker and which one is
the little branch, but the sucker is always the one in the middle.
This one's almost as big as the main stem.
Butt it to can just be plucked out.
As the tomatoes grow, if you haven't plucked them out when they're little, they tend to start getting pretty big.
This is about as big as I like to use my fingernail and thumb, about just a little bit smaller than a pencil.
And I try to cut all the way through it with my thumb nail.
Problem you run into is that if you just try to pluck it out
you might actually tear the main stem and cause some damage.
For suckers that have developed into bigger branches you want to take some pruners and cut off the branch.
Remember this side branch can remain because it's serving a useful purpose soaking up the sun's energy.
This plant right here is more than ready to prune. Now, I've chosen
two of the main stems as
the ones that I want to trellis and so now I can go back down the plant and take out the growing
stems that I really don't need anymore.
And this one at the bottom is a good example.
So I'll come in
and I'll cut it off
close to the base of
the main stem. Now you can see this is a pretty substantial growth.
In fact, there's already flowers and there's already tomatoes that have started developing on this part of the stem.
But it's in the way and I really don't want it anymore
so renewed energy will actually go to
the tomatoes that are already set on the plant and will actually help the entire plant grow. And I'll just continue this process,
looking for those suckers along the way that are really ones that I don't want anymore.
And I'll remove them.
Now remember, the suckers will grow into
completely viable main stems and at this point on this particular plant
I actually chose to keep the sucker as the one that I was going to trellis.
So now that I'm going back to clean up the plant
I'm actually cutting off what would have been the main stem
and now I'm allowing the sucker to become the main stem.
And if you wait until the suckers have started to take over to prune you'll find them everywhere.
Here's a sucker, here's a sucker,
here's a sucker, here's a sucker down here. There's some little ones that I can just pinch off,
but there's a lot of work involved if you just let the plant go crazy before you start pruning.
Most of the diseases that will infect your tomatoes come from
bacteria or fungi
and most of those actually come from the soil.
So another very important reason to prune is to try to minimize the infection your plant might get
from soil borne problems.
I've removed the suckers that were giving me concern on this plant
so now I'll focus on the bottom part of the main stem
and what I want to do is remove all the branches any suckers or other growths up to
about 15 to 18 inches off the ground.
Because most of the problems this plant will suffer will come from the soil,
when it rains or when I water, the potential exists for
spores and bacteria to bounce from the soil
onto any low-lying leaves and
that's how it gets into the plant.
So if I can remove these low-lying leaves before the plant has any problem, I reduce the risk
of bacteria and fungus infecting the plant. So it's a simple matter of coming in,
removing branches that are low on the plant,
and cleaning it up, so it's really
nice and runs minimal risk of being infected.
If there's a branch that's lying low, below that 15 to 18 inch point,
even if it's higher up on the plant
I'll remove that as well.
Another reason for removing the suckers and that lower growth of this entire section of plants is because it
improves the air circulation through this entire section and with improved air circulation
there's less likelihood that the leaves will remain wet.
And if they're not wet, they're less likely to have a bacterial or a fungus infection.
I don't remove
every sucker. Remember, I'm trying to get the maximum harvest in a particular space
so as I am pruning I'm selective as to which ones I take off and
this one right here, this branch actually began as a sucker.
It's got flower development. It's got good vertical growth.
So I'm going to tie this off the twine and make this another primary stem.
It's hard to cut off branches on a tomato plant
especially when they've got flowers and fruit already forming because
Isn't that the reason why you're growing tomato plants in the first place?
But ultimately by pruning off particularly those lower branches and the suckers
you're making a stronger plant and the fruit that remains on the plants will grow
faster and bigger because it's getting more energy from the plant.
As you prune it's important to realize how you're trellising and how you're going to grow your plant.
I'm growing vertically so these plants will get six, eight feet tall and so my pruning is to direct that
vertical growth to get a tall strong plant.
If your trellis isn't that tall and you're growing a much shorter plant
you may choose to keep more of those suckers so that you have a
bushier lower plant.
Because my plants are growing taller
I keep the lower portion as a main stem and then I'll allow
two to branch off and those two now becomes strong and as the plant gets higher each of those two
will have suckers and I'll allow some of those suckers to grow.
So the one becomes two and then those two branches may become four branches.
So by the time I get to the top that's six to eight feet high.
I have a very bushy plant that should be loaded with flowers and fruit.
You can accomplish the same thing if you're growing lower.
Instead of removing
a lot of those lower suckers let some of those lower suckers develop into primary
stems and then as it gets a few feet higher let some of those suckers branch out.
So your plant may only be 3 or 4 feet tall,
but it's the exact same type of pruning as far as you controlling how many branches
grow and how bushy the plant becomes.
My tomato plants are cleaned up.
I'm focusing energy now into the fruit and into the future growth and I'm ready for a good tomato season.
There you have it. How I prune tomatoes for the best harvest.
If you have any comments or questions
Please let me know below. If you haven't subscribed to the Gardener Scott channel
you can do so now and if you like the video, you can give me a thumbs up and share it.
I'm Gardener Scott.
Enjoy gardening.
you
You